

This is our first lab of Ansible.

1. create three linux instances named Ansible server, node1 and node2.
   connect them through Putty or Mobaxterm.

2. Use these commands in 
   
   Ansible-server
   
   sudo su
   wget https://dl.fedoraproject.org/pub/epel/epel-release-latest-9.noarch.rpm
   yum install epel-release-latest-9.noarch.rpm
   yum install git python python-level python-pip ansible openssl -y
   ansible --version(just to check if it is installed or not)
   
   Hosts file is a file in which you can add your nodes for communication among them.

   vi /etc/ansible/hosts (hosts file is located in that path)
   [demo] (name of the group and paste the private IP of the nodes)
   172.31.41.240
   172.31.42.228

   vi /etc/ansible/ansible.cfg (configuration file has to be change to work hosts file)
   uncomment inventory
   uncomment sudo_user
   
   adduser ansible
   passwd ansible (enter and type password)
   
3. Now we will add user in both nodes

   Node-1                         Node-2

   sudo su                        sudo su
   adduser ansible                adduser ansible
   passwd ansible                 passwd ansible
 
4. To give the root access to ansible user use command

   visudo (scroll down and got to root and below root type)
   ansible ALL=(ALL) NOPASSWD: ALL
   do it in all instances.

   su - ansible (run this command in all three server so that you can be ansible user)

   sudo yum install httpd -y (packages will start downloading this shows that ansible has root access now)
    
5. Now to establish connection between Server and nodes use

   vi /etc/ssh/sshd_config (do not forget to exit form ansible user)
   uncomment PermitRootLogin yes
   uncomment PasswordAuthentication yes
   comment out PasswordAuthentication no

   service sshd restart (this will apply the changes in config files)

   do it in all three instances.

6. su - ansible (in all three instances)
   
   now go to Ansible server
   
   ssh 172.31.41.240 (private IP of node1)
   password : enter the password

   Now you are logged into node1 so whatever change you will make here will reflect in node1 server.

   Similarly you can do it for node2.

If you want to connect to a node through server each time you have to enter password.
To avoid authentication every time we have to make a key in server and copy it in all nodes
so whenever you will access node you dont have to enter password node will see the key and authenticate itself.

7. Ansible server

   su - ansible
   ssh-keygen enter enter enter
   ls -a
   cd .ssh/
   ls (you will have 2 keys public and private)

   ssh-copy-id ansible@172.31.41.240(private ip of node1)
   enter password last time.
    
   ssh-copy-id ansible@172.31.42.228(privat e ip of node2)
   enter password last time.

   cd..

   ssh 172.31.41.240

   Now they are not asking password to authenticate you will directly logged into it.

Suppose you have 10 nodes and you want details of any perticular node or group.
These are the commands that will help :

8. ansible all --list-hosts
   It will show details of all nodes in inventory file. 

   ansible demo --list-hosts
   It will show details of all nodes in demo group.

   ansible demo [0] --list-hosts
   It will show you the details of demo's first node.
   0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 (indicator of all 10 nodes)
   for last node use -1 2nd last -2

   ansible demo [1:4] --list-hosts
   It will show detailes of range i.e. 2-5 nodes.

   
    
